TCGA notebook validation plots (#64)
d3b-center/annoFuse: vignettes/TCGA_validation.Rmd

To assess filtering sensitivity of _annoFuse_, we analyzed a subset of samples from TCGA and compared fusions retained with _annoFuse_ filtering and oncogenic prioritization to those deemed the final call set in a previously published analysis by The Fusion Analysis Working Group [PMID: 29617662](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29617662/).

A group of 160 samples were randomly selected from the following cancers: BLCA(10), BRCA(11), CESC(5), COAD(11),  ESCA(5) , GBM(7), HNSC(10), KIRP(9), LGG(9), LIHC(9), LUAD(5), LUSC(11), OV(9), PAAD(8), PCPG(2), PRAD(14), SARC(6), SKCM(9), TGCT(6), THCA(4). 

```{r }
# Sample manifest was obtained from CAVATICA Data browser and TCGA files were copied to working project.
tcga_manifest <- read_tsv(system.file("extdata", "sample_aliquot_tcga.tsv", package = "annoFuse"))
# Load [Final Fusion Call Set tab of Supplemental Table S1 of PMID: 29617662](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29617662/)
final_fusion <- read_tsv(system.file("extdata", "final_fusion_mmc2.txt", package = "annoFuse")) %>%
  # subset of final fusions in overlapping samples
  dplyr::filter(
    Sample %in% tcga_manifest$aliquot_id
  ) %>%
  as.data.frame() %>%
  unique()
```

> We ran [kf-rnaseq-workflow](https://github.com/kids-first/kf-rnaseq-workflow) to obtain fusion calls from STAR-Fusion and Arriba and rna quantification from RSEM. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We ran [kf-rnaseq-workflow](https://github.com/kids-first/kf-rnaseq-workflow) to obtain fusion calls from STAR-Fusion and Arriba and the expression level quantifications from RSEM. 
```

Reviewer: better so?

---
title: > 

>   TCGA validation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  annoFuse technical validation using TCGA Fusion calls
```

  affiliation: 
  - &id1 Center for Data-Driven Discovery in Biomedicine, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, USA
  email: gaonkark@chop.email.edu
- name: Federico Marini
  affiliation: 
  - &id2 Institute of Medical Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics (IMBEI), Mainz, Germany
  - Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis (CTH), Mainz, Germany
  email: marinif@uni-mainz.de
date: "`r Sys.Date()`"
package: "`r paste('annoFuse', packageVersion('annoFuse'))"
output: 
  html_document:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{TCGA validation }
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}  
  %\VignettePackage{annoFuse}
  %\VignetteKeywords{Software, Transcription, Visualization, GeneExpression, Annotation,
    GeneFusionDetection, GUI, ReportWriting}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE} 
knitr::opts_chunk$set(warning = FALSE, message = FALSE)
```

```{r}
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("readr"))
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("ggplot2"))
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("dplyr"))
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("qdapRegex"))
library("annoFuse")
```

# Introduction

> To assess our filtering strategy, we analyzed a subset of samples from TCGA and compared fusions retained with annoFuse filtering and prioritization to those deemed the final call set in a previously published analysis by The Fusion Analysis Working Group.
> 
> A group of 160 samples were randomly selected BLCA(10), BRCA(11), CESC(5), COAD(11),  ESCA(5) , GBM(7), HNSC(10), KIRP(9), LGG(9), LIHC(9), LUAD(5), LUSC(11), OV(9), PAAD(8), PCPG(2), PRAD(14), SARC(6), SKCM(9), TGCT(6), THCA(4). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To assess filtering sensitivity of _annoFuse_, we analyzed a subset of samples from TCGA and compared fusions retained with _annoFuse_ filtering and oncogenic prioritization to those deemed the final call set in a previously published analysis by The Fusion Analysis Working Group [PMID: 29617662](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29617662/).

A group of 160 samples were randomly selected from the following cancers: BLCA(10), BRCA(11), CESC(5), COAD(11),  ESCA(5) , GBM(7), HNSC(10), KIRP(9), LGG(9), LIHC(9), LUAD(5), LUSC(11), OV(9), PAAD(8), PCPG(2), PRAD(14), SARC(6), SKCM(9), TGCT(6), THCA(4). 
```

```{r }

> # manifest was obtained from CAVATICA Data browser TCGA files copied to working project

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Sample manifest was obtained from CAVATICA Data browser and TCGA files were copied to working project.
```

tcga_manifest <- read_tsv(system.file("extdata", "sample_aliquot_tcga.tsv", package = "annoFuse"))

> # Final fusion calls from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2211124718303954

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Load [Final Fusion Call Set tab of Supplemental Table S1 of PMID: 29617662](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29617662/)
```

final_fusion <- read_tsv(system.file("extdata", "final_fusion_mmc2.txt", package = "annoFuse")) %>%
  # subset of final fusions in overlapping samples
  dplyr::filter(
    Sample %in% tcga_manifest$aliquot_id
  ) %>%
  as.data.frame() %>%
  unique()
```

> We ran [kf-rnaseq-workflow](https://github.com/kids-first/kf-rnaseq-workflow) to obtain fusion calls from STAR-Fusion and Arriba and rna quantification from RSEM. 

Reviewer 2: I just added this bit to the manuscript as well

We then standardized STAR-Fusion and Arriba fusion calls using `fusion_standardization`. 

```{r }

# merged STAR-Fusion and arriba calls
tcga_arriba_df <- read_tsv(system.file("extdata", "merged_arriba_tcga.tsv", package = "annoFuse"))
tcga_starfusion_df <- read_tsv(system.file("extdata", "merged_starfusion_tcga.tsv", package = "annoFuse"))

# format

> fomatted_starfusion <- annoFuse::fusion_standardization(fusion_calls = tcga_starfusion_df, caller = "STARFUSION", tumorID = tcga_starfusion_df$Sample)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
formatted_starfusion <- annoFuse::fusion_standardization(fusion_calls = tcga_starfusion_df, caller = "STARFUSION", tumorID = tcga_starfusion_df$Sample)
```

# format

> fomatted_arriba <- annoFuse::fusion_standardization(fusion_calls = tcga_arriba_df, caller = "ARRIBA", tumorID = tcga_arriba_df$Sample)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
formatted_arriba <- annoFuse::fusion_standardization(fusion_calls = tcga_arriba_df, caller = "ARRIBA", tumorID = tcga_arriba_df$Sample)
```

# Merge starfusion and arriba

> formatted_calls <- rbind(fomatted_starfusion, fomatted_arriba)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
formatted_calls <- rbind(formatted_starfusion, formatted_arriba)
```

```

> Artifact and QC filtering was performed using `fusion_filtering_QC`. We filtered fusion using a wide range of spanningDelta : 10,20,30,40,50,100,150 and 200 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Artifact and QC filtering was performed using `fusion_filtering_QC`. We filtered fusions using the following range of spanningDelta : 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100, 150, and 200. 
```

merged_150 <- annoFuse::fusion_filtering_QC(standardFusioncalls = formatted_calls, readthroughFilter = FALSE, readingFrameFilter = "in-frame|frameshift|other", artifactFilter = "GTEx_Recurrent|DGD_PARALOGS|Normal|BodyMap|ConjoinG", junctionReadCountFilter = 1, spanningFragCountFilter = 150)

merged_200 <- annoFuse::fusion_filtering_QC(standardFusioncalls = formatted_calls, readthroughFilter = FALSE, readingFrameFilter = "in-frame|frameshift|other", artifactFilter = "GTEx_Recurrent|DGD_PARALOGS|Normal|BodyMap|ConjoinG", junctionReadCountFilter = 1, spanningFragCountFilter = 200)
```

```{r}
# get overlap with sample_id/aliquot_id with completed tasks
get_tcga_overlap <- function(x, tcga_manifest, final_fusion) {
  samples_in_final_fusion <- x %>%
    left_join(tcga_manifest, by = c("Sample" = "sample_id")) %>%
    dplyr::filter(aliquot_id %in% final_fusion$Sample) %>%
    dplyr::select(aliquot_id, FusionName) %>%
    unique()

  final_fusion_subset <- final_fusion %>%
    dplyr::filter(Sample %in% samples_in_final_fusion$aliquot_id & Fusion %in% samples_in_final_fusion$FusionName) %>%
    nrow()
  return(final_fusion_subset)
}
```

>  We then calculated overlaps of the subsetted published final fusion to our filtered fusion calls across all the cutoffs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 We then calculated overlaps of the subsetted published final fusions with our filtered fusion calls across all spanningDelta cutoffs.
```

  dplyr::bind_rows(merged_200 %>%
    dplyr::mutate("cutoff" = 200, "sensitivity" = get_tcga_overlap(merged_200, tcga_manifest, final_fusion) / length_final_fusion_subset)) %>%
  dplyr::mutate("change_spanning" = .$SpanningFragCount - .$JunctionReadCount)

hist_df <- as.data.frame(hist_df)
dat_text <- data.frame(
  label = c(
    paste("Mean", round(mean(hist_df[which(hist_df$cutoff == 10), "change_spanning"]))),
    paste("Mean", round(mean(hist_df[which(hist_df$cutoff == 20), "change_spanning"]))),
    paste("Mean", round(mean(hist_df[which(hist_df$cutoff == 30), "change_spanning"]))),
    paste("Mean", round(mean(hist_df[which(hist_df$cutoff == 40), "change_spanning"]))),
    paste("Mean", round(mean(hist_df[which(hist_df$cutoff == 50), "change_spanning"]))),
    paste("Mean", round(mean(hist_df[which(hist_df$cutoff == 100), "change_spanning"]))),
    paste("Mean", round(mean(hist_df[which(hist_df$cutoff == 150), "change_spanning"]))),
    paste("Mean", round(mean(hist_df[which(hist_df$cutoff == 200), "change_spanning"])))
  ),
  cutoff = c(10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100, 150, 200)
)
```

> Here, we visualize the distribution of spanningDelta (spanningFragCount - JunctionReadCount) across fusions called from the TCG to assess a cutoff for spanningDelta

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, we visualize the distribution of `spanningDelta` (spanningFragCount - JunctionReadCount) across fusions called from the TCGA to assess a cutoff for spanningDelta
```

```{r fig.height=8}
ggplot(hist_df, aes(x = change_spanning)) +
  geom_histogram(binwidth = 5) +
  scale_x_continuous(limits = c(0, 200)) +
  facet_wrap(. ~ cutoff) +
  theme_publication(base_size = 20) +
  geom_text(
    data = dat_text,
    mapping = aes(x = 100, y = 1200, label = label),
    hjust = -0.1,
    vjust = -1
  ) +
  theme(axis.title.x = element_text(size = 15), axis.title.y = element_text(size = 15))
```

> We find that sensitivity reaches 96% at cutoff of 100 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We find that sensitivity reaches 96% at a spanningDelta cutoff of 100 
```
